1. A DevOps engineer uses Linux to run, manage, and maintain the project.

2. A DevOps engineer uses Linux to manage the project in real time. Their job is to make sure the project:
runs properly, stays online, is updated, is secure, performs well, recovers if something fails
Developer writes the project
Devops runs the project on Linux.

3. Linux is the place where the project runs. If a company builds a website or app: 
Developer writes code
DevOps takes that code
Runs it on Linux server
Makes it available to users

4. Simple project flow:
Developer writes code
Code is pushed to Git
DevOps takes code
DevOps deploys code on Linux server
Linux runs the application
Users access the application

Navigation Commands

pwd	      Show current directory
ls	      List files and folders
ls -l	    List files with details
ls -a	    Show hidden files
cd        folder	Move into a folder (change directory)
cd ~	    Go to home directory
cd ..	    Move one folder back

File & Directory

mkdir folder	Create a folder
mkdir -p a/b/c	Create nested folders
touch file.txt	Create empty file
cp file1 file2	Copy file
mv file1 file2	Move or rename file
rm file.txt	Delete file
rm -r folder	Delete folder

File Content

cat file.txt	(Show full file content)
less file.txt	(View file page by page)
head file.txt	(Show first 10 lines)
tail file.txt	(Show last 10 lines)
tail -f file.txt	(Watch file updates live)
echo "text" > file.txt	(Write text to file)
echo "text" >> file.txt	(Append text to file)

Search Commands

grep "word" file.txt	    Search text in file
grep -r "word" folder/	  Search text in folder
find . -name file.txt   	Find file by name
find / -type f -name "*.log"	         Find all log files
which python	            Show command location
whereis python	          Show command + docs location

Networking Commands

ip a	               Show IP address
ping google.com	     Check network connection
curl google.com	     Test website/API response
wget URL	           Download file from URL
ss -tuln	           Show open ports
netstat -tuln	       Show listening ports
nslookup google.com	 Check DNS
dig google.com	     DNS lookup details

ext4 File System (Fourth Extended File System)
It is the most commonly used Linux file system and the default file system in many Linux distributions like Ubuntu and Debian.

What are logs?
Logs are records of events that a system, application, or service writes while it is running.

what are Docker?
Docker is a container platform used to build, package, run, and manage applications inside containers.

what are CI/CD Servers?
CI/CD Servers are servers that automatically build, test, and deploy code whenever developers make changes. They are the automation engine behind modern DevOps pipelines.

what are Cloud Servers?
Cloud Servers are servers that run in the cloud instead of on your own physical machine. 

what are Scripts and Automation?
Scripts and Automation means writing commands in a file so the computer can do tasks automatically instead of you doing them manually.
Scripts - Contain list of commands
Automation - making the system do tasks automatically without manual work.

ping: Checks whether another system/server is reachable over the network.
traceroute: Shows the path packets take from your system to destination server.
host: Performs DNS lookups.
dig: Advanced DNS lookup tool.
curl: Transfers data from servers.
ssh: Secure remote login to another machine.
tcpdump: Captures and analyzes network packets.








